# Python Basic Data Types


###### _Table of Contents_

- Type Related Functions
	1. [Retrieval](#type-retrieval)
	2. [Conversion](#type-conversion)
	3. [Hints](#type-hints)
- [Numeric Types](#numeric-types)
	1. Common Numeric Types
	2. Arithmetic Operators
	3. Functions
	4. Related Modules
- [Integer Sequence - Range](#range)
- [Text Sequence - Strings](#strings)
	1. Literals
	2. Escape Characters
	3. Length
	4. String Operators
	5. String Interpolation
	6. Methods
	7. Special Prefixes
	8. Unicode code point
- [Boolean Type](#boolean-type)
	1. Boolean Values
	2. Comparison Operators
	3. Boolean Operators
- [None Type](#none-type)
- [Union Type](#union-type)


## Type Related Functions

### Type Retrieval

The function `type(variable)` returns the data type of any variable.

### Type Conversion

The type names are also function names (`int()`, `float()`, `str()`, etc.) that usually converts other type of data to the specified type.

### Type Hints

The `typing` module provides runtime support for type hints.

```python
from typing import Any, Union, Optional, Callable, Generic, TypeVar, TypeAlias
Number = Union[int, float]
NullString = Optional[str]
Factors: TypeAlias = list[int]
```


## Numeric Types

### Common Numeric Types

**Integer** - Whole number. By default decimal; `0b` prefix for binary; `0o` prefix for octal; `0x` prefix for hexadecimal. 

**Floating-Point Number** - Number with a decimal point or using scientific notation (with an `e` sign).

**Complex Number** - Number in form of `a + bj` where `a` and `b` are integers or floats. `z.real` and `z.imag` indicates corresponding parts.

### Arithmetic Operators

| Operators | Descriptions |
|-----------|--------------|
| `+`       | Addition 			|
| `-`       | Subtraction 		|
| `*`       | Multiplication 	|
| `**`      | Power 			|
| `/`       | Division 			|
| `//`      | Floor Division 	|
| `%`       | Modulo 			|

### Functions

1. `pow(x, y)` returns `x` to the power `y`.
2. `abs(x)` returns absolute value or magnitude of `x`.
3. `round(x, n=0)` returns `x` rounded to `n` digits, rounding half to even.

### Related Modules

1. [`math`](//docs.python.org/library/math) provides access to the mathematical functions defined by the C standard; cannot be used with complex numbers.
2. [`cmath`](//docs.python.org/library/cmath) provides access to mathematical functions for complex numbers; will accept all common numeric types.


## Range

Range is a special type of data which is a sequence of integers generated by the `range(start=0, stop, step=1)` function. For a non-zero step, the sequence are determined by the formula 

`r[i] = start + step*i` where `i >= 0` and `r[i] < stop` for a positive step, `i >= 0` and `r[i] > stop` for a negative step.


## Strings

### Literals

A single line string begins and ends with a single quote or double quote.

A multiline string begins and ends with three single quotes or double quotes. Use `\` at the end of a line to indicate line continuation.

### Escape Characters

An escape character consists of a backslash `\` followed by a character indicates what to add to the string.

| Syntax | Descriptions |
|--------|--------------|
| `\'`   | Single Quote |
| `\"`   | Double Quote |
| `\\`   | Backslash 	|
| `\n`   | Line Feed 		|
| `\r`   | Carriage Return 	|
| `\t`   | Tabulation 		|
| `\v`   | Line Tabulation 	|
| `\f`   | Form Feed 		|
| `\a`   | Bell 			|
| `\b`   | Backspace 		|
| `\o`   | Octal Value 		|
| `\x`   | Hex Value 		|
| `\0`   | Null Character 	|

Despite consisting of two characters, it is commonly referred to as a singular escape character.

### Length

`len(string)` returns the number of characters in the string in form of an integer.

### String Operators

| Operators | Descriptions |
|-----------|--------------|
| `+`       | Concatenation	|
| `*`       | Repetition 	|
| `[]`      | Slicing 		|
| `in`      | Membership 			|
| `not in`  | Negated Membership 	|

### String Interpolation

Use the `string % (variable1, variable2, ..., variableN)` syntax to format a string, i.e. to insert values in the tuple to the string.

| Placeholders | Descriptions |
|--------------|--------------|
| `%d`         | Signed decimal integer 	|
| `%u`         | Unsigned decimal integer 	|
| `%f`         | Floating-point real number |
| `%c`         | Single character 			|
| `%s`         | String 					|

Adding a number before the letter indicates the total space that shall be reserved.
By default, the content of the placehold aligns right, but a minus sign switch it to align left.

### Methods

**Letter Case**

1. `string.upper()` returns a string with all letters converted to upper case.
2. `string.lower()` returns a string with all letters converted to lower case.
3. `string.title()` returns a titlecased string, i.e. with first letter of each word capitalized.
4. `string.isupper()` checks if the string contains at least 1 letter and all letters are uppercased.
5. `string.islower()` checks if the string contains at least 1 letter and all letters are lowercased.
6. `string.istitle()` checks if the string contains at least 1 letter and all letters are properly titlecased, i.e. with first letter of each word capitalized.

**Character Categories**

1. `string.isalpha()` checks if the string is not empty and has only letters.
2. `string.isalnum()` checks if the string is not empty and has only letters and numbers.
3. `string.isdecimal()` checks if the string is not empty and has only numbers.
4. `string.isspace()` checks if the string is not empty and has only whitespace.
5. `string.isidentifier()` checks if the string is a valid identifier in Python.

**Affix**

1. `string.startswith('prefix')` checks if the string starts with the prefix string.
2. `string.endswith('suffix')` checks if the string ends with the suffix string.

**Separation**

1. `string.split(separator=' ')` splits a string to a list of strings according to the separator string, with the separator omiited.
2. `string.partition()` splits a string into three parts, the text before the separator string, the separator itself and the text after it.
3. `separator.join([string1, string2, ..., stringN])` joins a list or tuple of strings to one string with the separator string added between each two.

**Search and Replacement**

1. `string.find(substring)` returns the index of first occurrence of the substring, or -1 if not found.
2. `string.rfind(substring)` returns the index of last occurrence of the substring, or -1 if not found.
3. `string.replace(substring, repl)` returns the string with each matching occurrence of the substring replaced by the replacement string.

**Strip**

1. `string.strip(chars)` strips out any character in the chars string (whitespace if omitted) from both sides of the string.
2. `string.lstrip(chars)` strips out any character in the chars string (whitespace if omitted) from the left side of the string.
3. `string.rstrip(chars)` strips out any character in the chars string (whitespace if omitted) from the right side of the string.

**Alignment**

1. `string.center(width, padding)` center aligns the string to a specified width using the padding character (`' '` if omitted) as the fill.
2. `string.ljust(width, padding)` left aligns the string to a specified width using the padding character (`' '` if omitted) as the fill.
3. `string.rjust(width, padding)` right aligns the string to a specified width using the padding character (`' '` if omitted) as the fill.

**Formatting**

`string.format(variable1, variable2, ..., variableN)` formats the specified values and insert them inside the string's placeholder.

The placeholder is defined by curly brackets `{}` that hold:

- An index number (starting from 0) that maps to positional parameters or a keyword that maps to keyword parameters;
- Optional `:` followed by the type characters which together specify the formatting type.

| Type Character | Descriptions |
|----------------|--------------|
| `<`            | Left align to the remaining space 					|
| `>`            | Right align to the remaining space 					|
| `^`            | Center align to the remaining space 					|
| `=`            | Force the plus/minus sign to the leftmost position 	|
| `,`            | Use commas as thousand separators 					|
| `_`            | Use underscores as thousand separators 				|
| `+`            | Add a plus sign to positive numbers 					|
| `d`            | Decimal integer 										|
| `b`            | Binary format 										|
| `o`            | Octal format 										|
| `x`            | Hexadecimal format 									|
| `X`            | Hexadecimal format (upper case) 						|
| `e`            | Scientific notation 									|
| `E`            | Scientific notation (uppercase E) 					|
| `f`            | Fixed point number 									|
| `F`            | Fixed point number (uppercase INF and NAN) 			|
| `g`            | General format - the shorter version of `f` and `e` 	|
| `G`            | General format (uppercase E) 						|
| `%`            | Percentage format 									|
| `c`            | Corresponding Unicode character 						|

### Special Prefixes

**Raw Strings**

Place an `r` before the beginning quotation mark of a string to make it a raw string.

A raw string completely ignores all escape characters and prints any backslash that appears in the string.

**Formatted Strings**

Formatted strings have an `f` prefix before the starting quotation mark.

The expressions placed directly inside the braces will be evaluated and interpolated in the string.

### Unicode Code Point

- The `ord()` function gets the code point of a one-character string;
- The `chr()` function gets the one-character string of an integer code point.


## Boolean Type

### Boolean Values

Boolean data type has only two values: `True` and `False`.

### Comparison Operators

| Operators | Descriptions |
|-----------|--------------|
| `==`      | Equal to     |
| `!=`      | Not equal to |
| `<`       | Less than    |
| `>`       | Greater than |
| `<=`      | Less than or equal to    |
| `>=`      | Greater than or equal to |
| `is`      | Object identity (memory address) |
| `is not`  | Negated object identity          |

### Boolean Operators

**Binary Operators**

- `and` - Intersection. A series of values connected by `and` returns the first value evaluated `False` or the last value.
- `or` - Union. A series of values connected by `or` returns the first value evaluated `True` or the last value.

**Unary Operator**

- `not` - Complement.


## None Type

None data type has only one value: `None`, representing the null value or the null object. It is commonly returned by functions that do not explicitly return a value.


## Union Type

A union object holds the value of the bitwise or `|` operation on multiple type objects, and creates a Union Type.

| [Type Hints](#type-hints) | Shorthand Syntax |
|---------------------------|------------------|
| `typing.Union[X, Y]` | `X \| Y`    |
| `typing.Optional[X]` | `X \| None` |


## *References*
Sweigart, A. (2015). _Automate the Boring Stuff With Python: Practical Programming for Total Beginners_. San Francisco, CA: No Starch Press.
